

# Bumpy data frame array (1.0)

## Overview

The `bumpy_data_frame_array` format provides an on-disk representation of an array where each entry is an data frame of the same type.
This is based on the `BumpyMatrix` subclasses for data frames, as implemented in the [**BumpyMatrix** Bioconductor package](https://bioconductor.org/packages/BumpyMatrix).

## Object metadata

The `OBJECT` file should contain a `bumpy_data_frame_array` property, itself a JSON object with the following properties:

- `version`, a string specifying the version of the `bumpy_data_frame_array` format.
  This should be set to "1.0".

## Directory structure

The directory should contain a `partitions.h5` HDF5 file.
This file should contain an `bumpy_data_frame_array` group.
The group should contain `dimensions`, a 1-dimensional dataset of any type that is representable by a 64-bit unsigned integer.
`bumpy_data_frame_array/dimensions` contains the extents of the dimensions of the bumpy array.

The `bumpy_data_frame_array` group also should contain `lengths`, a 1-dimensional dataset of any type that is representable by a 64-bit unsigned integer.
Each entry corresponds to an entry of the bumpy data frame array - that is, an data frame -
and defines the number of consecutive rows in the `concatenated` object (see below) that can be used to construct each data frame.

The directory should also contain a `concatenated` subdirectory, which contains a child object that satisfies the `DATA_FRAME` interface.
The height of this child object should be equal to the sum of lengths in the `bumpy_data_frame_array/lengths` dataset of the `partitions.h5` file.
In effect, this child object represents the concatenation of all of the data frames in the array;
reconstructing the data frame for a particular array entry involves taking a contiguous slice of rows at an offset defined by the sum of the preceding `lengths`.

If the `bumpy_data_frame_array` group does not contain an `indices` subgroup, it is assumed that the bumpy array is dense.
The `bumpy_data_frame_array/lengths` dataset should have length equal to the product of `bumpy_data_frame_array/dimensions`.
Each entry of `bumpy_data_frame_array/lengths` maps to an array entry by flattening the array to a 1-dimensional vector where the first dimension is the fastest-changing, then the second, and so on.

If the `bumpy_data_frame_array` group does contain an `indices` subgroup, it is assumed that the bumpy array is sparse.
The `bumpy_data_frame_array/indices` subgroup should contain one dataset per dimension, named after the index of the dimension, e.g., `0` for the first dimension, `1` for the second dimension, and so on.
Each `bumpy_data_frame_array/indices/X` dataset should be 1-dimensional with length equal to `bumpy_data_frame_array/lengths`, and should have a datatype that is representable by a 64-bit unsigned integer.
These datasets define the array coordinates for the corresponding entry of `bumpy_data_frame_array/lengths`.
Entries in each dataset should be less than the extent of the corresponding dimension.
Coordinates should also be non-duplicated and sorted in increasing order where the first dimension is the fastest-changing, then the second, and so on.

Optionally, the `bumpy_data_frame_array` group may contain a `names` subgroup.
This may contain any number of 1-dimensional string datasets named after the corresponding dimension, e.g., `0`, `1`.
Each dataset contains the names for its dimension and should have a length equal to the extent of that dimension.
The datatype of each dataset should be representable by a UTF-8 encoded string.

## Height

The height of the bumpy data frame array is defined as the extent of the first dimension, as specified in the `bumpy_data_frame_array/dimensions` dataset of `partitions.h5`.

## Dimensions

The dimensions of the bumpy data frame array are taken from the `bumpy_data_frame_array/dimensions` dataset of `partitions.h5`.
