

# Spatial experiment (1.1)

## Overview

The `spatial_experiment` format provides an on-disk representation of a spatial experiment. 
It is based on the `SpatialExperiment` class from the [**SpatialExperiment** bioconductor package](https://bioconductor.org/packages/SpatialExperiment).

## Object metadata

The `OBJECT` file should contain a `spatial_experiment` property, which is itself a JSON object with the following properties:

- `version`, a string specifying the version of the `spatial_experiment` format.
  This should be set to "1.1".

In addition, the `OBJECT` file should contain all properties expected for the [`single_cell_experiment`](../single_cell_experiment) format, i.e., a `single_cell_experiment` property.
This transitively includes the properties that are expected of the [`summarized_experiment`](../summarized_experiment) and [`ranged_summarized_experiment`](../ranged_summarized_experiment) formats. 

## Files

The directory should contain all files expected for the [`single_cell_experiment`](../single_cell_experiment) format.
This includes the transitive expectations of files that should be present in the [`summarized_experiment`](../summarized_experiment) and [`summarized_experiment`](../ranged_summarized_experiment) formats.
The dimensions of the spatial experiment are determined from the `summarized_experiment`-based files.

The directory should contain a `coordinates` subdirectory, which contains a [`dense_array`](../dense_array) object.
The array should be two-dimensional and the extent of the first dimension should be equal to the number of columns in the spatial experiment.
The extent of the second dimension should be either 2 or 3.
Each row of the dense array contains the spatial x/y(/z) coordinates of the corresponding sample in the spatial experiment.

The directory should contain an `images` subdirectory, which in turn contains a `mapping.h5` HDF5 file.
This file should contain a `spatial_experiment` group, which contains the following children:

- `sample_names`, a 1-dimensional string dataset containing sample names.
  Names should be unique.
  The datatype should be representable by a UTF-8 encoded string.
- `column_samples`, a 1-dimensional integer dataset containing the mapping of spatial experiment columns to samples.
  The length of this dataset should be equal to the number of columns of the spatial experiment.
  The datatype of this dataset is representable by a 64-bit unsigned integer.
  Each value should be less than the length of `sample_names`.
- `image_samples`, a 1-dimensional integer dataset containing the mapping of images to samples.
  The datatype of this dataset is representable by a 64-bit unsigned integer.
  Each value should be less than the length of `sample_names`.
  Every sample should be indexed at least once in `image_samples`, i.e., every sample should have at least one associated image.
- `image_ids`, a 1-dimensional string dataset containing the image identifiers.
  This should have the same length as `image_samples`.
  The datatype should be representable by a UTF-8 encoded string.
  Image identifiers should be unique within the set of images associated with a given sample (as defined by `image_samples`).
- `image_formats`, a 1-dimensional string dataset specifying the format for each image.
  This should have the same length as `image_samples`.
  The datatype should be representable by a UTF-8 encoded string.
  Values should be either `"PNG"`, `"TIFF"` or `"OTHER"`.
- `image_scale_factor`, a 1-dimensional dataset containing the scaling factor for each image.
  This should have the same length as `image_samples`.
  The datatype of this dataset is representable by a 64-bit float.
  Each value should be positive; multiplying the coordinates in `coordinates` by the scaling factor converts them into pixel coordinates in the corresponding image.

The number of images is determined from the length of `image_samples` in the `images/mapping.h5` file.
Each image should be represented by a file or directory inside the `images` subdirectory, named after its positional index, e.g., `0` for the first image, `1` for the second image.
The exact name is determined from `image_formats`:

- For PNG images, a `.png` file extension should be added.
  Thus, the full name of the file would look like `0.png` for the first image, `1.png` for the second image, and so on.
- For TIFF images, a `.tif` file extension should be added.
  Thus, the full name of the file would look like `0.tif` for the first image, `1.tif` for the second image, and so on.
- For OTHER images, the positional index is directly used as the directory name inside `images`.
  This directory should contain a child object that satisfies the `IMAGE` interface.

## Height

The height of the `spatial_experiment` is defined in the same manner as that of the underlying [`summarized_experiment`](../summarized_experiment).

## Dimensions

The dimensions of the `spatial_experiment` is defined in the same manner as that of the [`summarized_experiment`](../summarized_experiment).

## Interfaces

The `spatial_experiment` satisfies the `SUMMARIZED_EXPERIMENT` interface.
