# HDF5 dense array

## Overview

A dense array stored inside a HDF5 file, corresponding to the [`hdf5_dense_array`](https://github.com/ArtifactDB/BiocObjectSchemas/raw/master/raw/hdf5_dense_array/v1.json) schema.

The file should contain a dataset at the name specified by `~hdf5_dense_array.dataset`.
The dimension extents of this dataset should be listed in reverse order to those in `~array.dimensions`,
i.e., the extent of the last HDF5 dimension should be equal to the extent of the first dimension in `~array.dimensions`.
This is because the dimensions reported in `~array.dimensions` are ordered from fastest-changing to slowest,
while the HDF5 library reports dataset dimensions from slowest-changing to fastest. 
In the context of matrices, this implies storage in a column-major layout where the first (faster) dimension corresponds to the rows and the second (slower) dimension corresponds to the columns.

The type of the array is specified by `~array.type` and can be integer, boolean, numeric, or string.
The exact HDF5 datatype is generally left to the discretion of the data generator, with some restrictions:

- String arrays can be represented by any string HDF5 dataset.
  The choice of datatype is left to the discretion of the data generator.
- Number arrays should be represented by any integer or floating-point HDF5 dataset.
  - **For `~hdf5_dense_array.version >= 3`:** the HDF5 datatype may be any integer or float that is a subset of a 64-bit float.
    See the [HDF5 policy draft (0.1.0)](https://github.com/ArtifactDB/Bioc-HDF5-policy/tree/0.1.0) for more details.
- Integer arrays should be represented by an integer HDF5 dataset.
  - **For `~hdf5_dense_array.version >= 3`:** the data type should be a subset of a 32-bit signed integer.
- Boolean arrays are stored as integer HDF5 datasets, where a value of 1 is truthy and a value of zero is falsey.
  - **For `~hdf5_dense_array.version >= 3`:** the data type should be a subset of a 32-bit signed integer.

## Missing values

The treatment of missing values is version-dependent:

- **For `~hdf5_dense_array.version >= 3`:** 
  the dataset may have a `missing-value-placeholder` attribute, containing a scalar value to use as a missing value placeholder.
  Any value equal to this placeholder should be treated as missing.
  For non-string types, the HDF5 datatype of the attribute should be exactly equal to that of the dataset.
  For string types, the datatype only needs to be same string type, and comparisons should be performed by byte-wise comparisons (e.g., with `strcmp`).
  For numbers, the scalar value may be NaN, in which case all NaNs in the dataset are treated as missing regardless of the payload.
  If no attribute exists, it can be assumed that no values are missing.
  See the [HDF5 policy draft (0.1.0)](https://github.com/ArtifactDB/Bioc-HDF5-policy/tree/0.1.0) for more details.
- **For `~hdf5_dense_array.version = 2`:** 
  the dataset may have a `missing-value-placeholder` attribute, containing a scalar value to use as a missing value placeholder.
  Any value equal to this placeholder should be treated as missing.
  For non-string types, the HDF5 datatype of the attribute should be exactly equal to that of the dataset.
  For string types, the datatype only needs to be same string type, and comparisons should be performed by byte-wise comparisons (e.g., with `strcmp`).
  For numbers, the scalar value may be NaN with a non-default payload, which should be considered via byte-wise comparisons, e.g., with `memcmp`.
  If no attribute exists, it can be assumed that no values are missing.
- **For `~hdf5_dense_array.version = 1`:** 
  no placeholder is present for non-string types.
  Missing integers and booleans are represented by -2147483648 instead.
  Missing numbers are represented by a quiet NaN with a payload of 1954.
  Missing strings are represented by a `missing-value-placeholder` attribute, containing a scalar value of some string type.

## Dimension names

The file may also contain the dimnames of the array, stored in a separate HDF5 group.
If present, the name of the group should be listed in the `~hdf5_dense_array.dimnames` property.
This group should contain zero or one string datasets for each dimension. 
The name of each string dataset is based on its dimension - `"0"` for rows, `"1"` for columns - and should have length equal to the extent of that dimension,
i.e., the dataset named `"0"` should have length equal to the first entry of `~array.dimensions`.
If no dataset is not present for a dimension, it can be assumed that no dimnames are available for that dimension.

## Example usage

```cpp
#include "takane/takane.hpp"

takane::hdf5_dense_array::Parameters params(dataset_name, {10, 20, 30});
params.type = takane::array::Type::STRING;

takane::hdf5_dense_array::validate(file_path, params);
```
