

# Data frame (1.0)

## Overview

The `data_frame` format provides an on-disk representation of a data frame, based on the `DataFrame` class from the [**S4Vectors** Bioconductor package](https://bioconductor.org/packages/S4Vectors).

## Object metadata

The `OBJECT` file should contain a `data_frame` property, itself a JSON object with the following properties:

- `version`, a string specifying the version of the `data_frame` format.
  This should be set to "1.0".

## Directory contents 

The directory should contain a `basic_columns.h5` HDF5 file, which in turn should contain an `data_frame` group.
This group should have a `row-count` attribute, which should be a scalar dataset of any datatype that is representable by a 64-bit unsigned integer.
The value of this attribute specifies the number of rows in the data frame.

The `data_frame` group should contain `column_names`, a 1-dimensional string dataset containing the column names of the data frame.
Column names should not be empty or duplicated, and no entries should be missing.
The length of this dataset defines the number of columns of the data frame.
The datatype should be representable by a UTF-8 encoded string.

The `data_frame` group may optionally contain `row_names`, a 1-dimensional string dataset containing the row names of the data frame if any are present.
The length of this dataset should be equal to the number of rows in the data frame.
The datatype should be representable by a UTF-8 encoded string.
No entries should be missing, though the dataset may contain empty or duplicated strings.
(This is more relaxed than the column names as the row names are considered to be descriptive rather than structural aspects of the data frame.)

The `data_frame` group should contain the `data` subgroup, which stores all "basic" columns.
Each basic column is represented by a HDF5 group or dataset named after the positional index of the column, e.g., `0` for the first column, `1` for the second column, and so on.
See [below](#column-representations) on the expected representation of each basic column.

The directory may also contain a `other_columns` subdirectory, which stores all "non-basic" columns.
Each non-basic column is represented by a subdirectory within `other_columns` that is named after the positional index of the column, e.g., `2` for the third column, `3` for the fourth column, and so on.
See [below](#non-basic) on the expected representation of each non-basic column.
If no `other_columns` directory is present, it can be assumed that there are no non-basic columns.

Each column in the data frame should be represented exactly once across `basic_columns.h5` and `other_columns`.
Thus, if a HDF5 dataset or group named `0` is present inside `data_frame/data`, there should not be a `0` subdirectory in `other_columns`.

The directory may contain an `element_annotations` subdirectory, which contains a child object that satisfies the `DATA_FRAME` interface.
This child object should have number of rows equal to the number of columns, i.e., the length of the `data_frame/column_names` dataset in `basic_columns.h5`.
Each row of this child object corresponds to a column of the data frame and contains additional annotations for that column.

The directory may contain an `other_annotations` subdirectory, which contains a child object that satisfies the `SIMPLE_LIST` interface.
This holds extra annotations for the entire data frame.

## Column representations

### Basic, not factor

Consider the basic column X, i.e., the X-th column in the data frame.
If this column is not a
factor,
it is represented by a HDF5 dataset at `data_frame/data/X`.
This dataset should be a 1-dimensional and of length equal to the number of rows.
It should have a `type` scalar attribute of any string datatype that is represented by a UTF-8 encoded string.
The value of the `type` attribute specifies the type of the column and the expected HDF5 datatype of the dataset itself:

- For `type = "integer"` or `"boolean"`, the datatype should be representable by a 32-bit signed integer.
  Check out the [HDF5 policy draft (v0.1.0)](https://github.com/ArtifactDB/Bioc-HDF5-policy/tree/v0.1.0) for more details.
- For `type = "number"`, the datatype should be representable by a 64-bit float.
- For `type = "string"`, the datatype should be representable by a UTF-8 encoded string.

For `type = "string"`, the `data_frame/data/X` dataset may optionally contain a `format` attribute.
If present, this should be a scalar attribute of a datatype that is represented by a UTF-8 encoded string.
The attribute itself should contain one of the following values:

- `"none"`: no constraints on the contents of each string.
  This is the default behaviour if no `format` is present.
- `"date"`: strings should be dates following a `YYYY-MM-DD` format.
- `"date-time"`: strings should be Internet Date/Time values following the format described in [RFC3339](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3339).

Missing values are represented by placeholder values, defined in the `missing-value-placeholder` attribute of the `data_frame/data/X` dataset.
The attribute should be scalar and have the same datatype as `data_frame/data/X`
(except in the case of strings, where any datatype may be used for the attribute as long as it is compatible with a UTF-8 encoded string).
All values in the dataset equal to the placeholder should be treated as missing.
See the [HDF5 policy draft (v0.1.0)](https://github.com/ArtifactDB/Bioc-HDF5-policy/tree/v0.1.0) for details.

### Factor

Consider a column X containing a factor.
This is represented by a HDF5 group at `data_frame/data/X`.
It should have a `type` scalar attribute of any string datatype that is represented by a UTF-8 encoded string.
This attribute should contain the `"factor"` string.

The `data_frame/data/X` group should contain `levels`, a 1-dimensional string dataset containing the factor levels.
The datatype should be representable by a UTF-8 encoded string.
All levels should be unique.

The `data_frame/data/X` group should contain `codes`, a 1-dimensional dataset containing the 0-indexed factor codes. 
The length of this dataset should be equal to the number of rows, and the datatype should be representable by a 64-bit unsigned integer.
Values of this dataset should either be less than the number of levels or equal to the placeholder value.

Missing factor entries are represented by placeholder values, defined in the `missing-value-placeholder` attribute of the `data_frame/data/X/codes` dataset.
The attribute should be scalar and have the same datatype as `data_frame/data/X/codes`.
All values in the dataset equal to the placeholder should be treated as missing.
See the [HDF5 policy draft (v0.1.0)](https://github.com/ArtifactDB/Bioc-HDF5-policy/tree/v0.1.0) for details.

The `data_frame/data/X` group may also have an `ordered` attribute, which should be a scalar of any datatype that fits into a 32-bit signed integer.
If present, a non-zero value indicates that the factor levels should be treated as ordered.
Otherwise, the levels are treated as unordered.



### Non-basic

We consider the non-basic column Y, i.e., the X-th column in the data frame.
This may be any object type that is supported by **takane** and has a concept of "height".
The subdirectory at `other_columns/Y` holds the on-disk representation of this non-basic column, making it a child object of the enclosing data frame.
The height of the child object should be equal to the number of rows in the enclosing data frame.
A common use case is that of nested data frames where one data frame is a column of another data frame and has the same number of rows.

## Height

The height of the data frame is defined as the number of rows, as specified in the `row-count` attribute of `basic_columns.h5`.

## Dimensions

The dimensions of the data frame is defined as the number of rows (`row-count`) and columns (the length of `column_names`).

## Interfaces

The `data_frame` object satisfies the `DATA_FRAME` interface.
