

# Genomic ranges (1.0)

## Overview

The `genomic_ranges` format provides an on-disk representation of a collection of genomic intervals.
It is based on the `GRanges` class from the [**GenomicRanges** Bioconductor package](https://bioconductor.org/packages/GenomicRanges).

## Object metadata

The `OBJECT` file should contain a `genomic_ranges` property, itself a JSON object with the following properties:

- `version`, a string specifying the version of the `genomic_ranges` format.
  This should be set to "1.0".

## Directory structure

The directory should contain a `sequence_information` subdirectory that holds a child object of type `sequence_information`.
The number of reference sequences in the genomic ranges is defined from the number of sequences in the `sequence_information` child.
A reference sequence is considered to have an enforcible length if it has a non-missing sequence length and is not circular, based on the information in `sequence_information`.

The directory should contain an `ranges.h5` HDF5 file, which in turn should contain a `genomic_ranges` group.
This group should in turn contain several 1-dimensional datasets, all of which should be of the same length.
The length of each dataset represents the number of genomic intervals in the genomic ranges object.
The following datasets should be present:

- `sequence`, an integer dataset of any datatype that can be exactly represented by a 64-bit unsigned integer.
  Values represent indices into the `sequence_information` and thus should be less than the number of sequences.
- `start`, an integer dataset of any datatype that can be exactly represented by a 64-bit signed integer.
  Values represent 1-based genomic coordinates and may be zero or negative for intervals that extend beyond the start of the reference sequence (e.g., for circular sequences).
- `width`, an integer dataset of any datatype that can be exactly represented by a 64-bit unsigned integer.
  Values represent the width of the interval in base pairs.
- `strand`, an integer dataset of any datatype that can be exactly represented by a 32-bit signed integer.
  Values represent the strand, i.e., -1 (reverse), 0 (unstranded) or 1 (forward).

For each interval, the value of `start + width` should fit in a 64-bit signed integer.
If a reference sequence has an enforcible length, all intervals assigned to that sequence (based on `genomic_ranges/sequence`) should have `start >= 1` and `start + width - 1` no greater than the sequence length.

The `genomic_ranges` group may optionally contain `name`, a 1-dimensional string dataset containing the names of the genomic intervals.
Any HDF5 string datatype may be used here.
The length of this dataset should be equal to the number of intervals.

The directory may contain a `range_annotations` subdirectory, which contains a child object that satisfies the `DATA_FRAME` interface.
This child object should have number of rows equal to the number of intervals.
Each row of this child object corresponds to an interval and contains additional annotations for that interval.

The directory may contain an `other_annotations` subdirectory, which contains a child object that satisfies the `SIMPLE_LIST` interface.
This holds extra annotations for the entire collection of genomic ranges. 

## Height

The height of the genomic ranges object is defined as the number of intervals, as determined by the length of the datasets in the `genomic_ranges` group of `ranges.h5`.
