# CSV data frame

## Overview

A data frame object stored inside a CSV file, formatted as described in the [**comservatory** specification (version 1.0)](https://github.com/ArtifactDB/comservatory).
This corresponds to the [`csv_data_frame`](https://github.com/ArtifactDB/BiocObjectSchemas/raw/master/raw/csv_data_frame/v1.json) schema.
We use `~` below to denote properties of the schema.

The name of each column should be identical to that of the corresponding `~data_frame.columns.name` property in the schema.
The type of each column is determined from the corresponding `~data_frame.columns.type` property:

- Boolean columns are stored as **comservatory** boolean columns. 
- Number columns are stored as **comservatory** number columns, where all (non-missing) values should be representable by IEEE754 double-precision floats.
- An integer column is stored as a **comservatory** integer column, where all (non-missing) values must be representable by a 32-bit signed integer.
- A factor column relies on an array of factor levels referenced by the `~data_frame.columns.levels` property.
  The exact treatment of this column is version-dependent:
  - **For `~data_frame.version >= 2`:** A factor column is represented as a **comservatory** integer column containing 0-based indices into the array of levels.
    All (non-missing) values are non-negative and less than the total number of levels.
  - **For `~data_frame.version = 1`:** A factor column is represented as a **comservatory** string dataset.
    Each (non-missing) entry in the string dataset should either be present in the set of levels or be equal to the missing placeholder value (see below).
- String columns are stored as **comservatory** string columns. 
  Strings may be associated with further format constraints based on the `~data_frame.columns.format` property, which may be one of the following:
  - No format constraints.
  - String must be a `YYYY-MM-DD` date.
  - String must be an Internet date/time complying with the RFC3339 specification.

For non-atomic columns, a placeholder column should be present in the CSV.
This placeholder may be of any type as it will be ignored by readers.

The number of rows in the CSV should be equal to `~data_frame.dimensions[0]`.

If row names are present, they should be present in the CSV as an additional column of strings preceding all columns in `~data_frame.columns`..
The column name of the row name column may be anything as long as it does not conflict with the other names of columns in `~data_frame.columns.name`.
All row names should be non-missing.
This additional column should be present if and only if `~data_frame.row_names = true`.

## Example usage

Here we validate a CSV data frame with columns of different types and row names:

```cpp
#include "takane/takane.hpp"

std::vector<takane::data_frame::ColumnDetails> expected_columns(5);
expected_columns[0].type = takane::data_frame::ColumnType::INTEGER;
expected_columns[1].type = takane::data_frame::ColumnType::STRING;
expected_columns[2].type = takane::data_frame::ColumnType::STRING;
expected_columns[2].format = takane::data_frame::StringFormat::DATETIME;
expected_columns[3].type = takane::data_frame::ColumnType::FACTOR;
expected_columns[3].add_factor_level("foo"); // taken from 'data_frame.columns[3].levels'
expected_columns[3].add_factor_level("bar");
expected_columns[4].type = takane::data_frame::ColumnType::NUMBER;

takane::csv_data_frame::Parameters params;
params.num_rows = 9876;
params.has_row_names = true;
params.columns = &expected_columns; // can also pass by value here.

takane::data_frame::validate_csv(path, params);
```

Note that the row name column does not need to be considered in the set of `expected_columns`;
it is handled separately by the `has_row_names = true` argument.
