

# Atomic vector (1.0)

## Overview

The `atomic_vector` format provides an on-disk representation of typed arrays, based on R's atomic vectors.

## Object metadata

The `OBJECT` file should contain an `atomic_vector` property, which is itself a JSON object with the following properties:

- `version`, a string specifying the version of the `atomic_vector` format.
  This should be set to "1.0".

## Directory structure

The directory should contain a `contents.h5` HDF5 file.
This file should contain an `atomic_vector` group with the following attributes:

- `type`, a scalar string attribute specifying the type of the vector.
  Any HDF5 string datatype may be used here.
  This should be one of `"integer"`, `"boolean"`, `"string"` or `"number"`.

The `atomic_vector` group should in turn contain `values`, a 1-dimensional dataset.
The HDF5 datatype of the dataset should match the `type` attribute:

- For `type = "integer"` or `"boolean"`, the datatype should be any integer type that can be exactly represented by a 32-bit signed integer.
  Check out the [HDF5 policy draft (v0.1.0)](https://github.com/ArtifactDB/Bioc-HDF5-policy/tree/v0.1.0) for more details.
- For `type = "number"`, the datatype should be any integer/float type that can be exactly represented by a 64-bit float.
- For `type = "string"`, the datatype should be any string type that can be represented by a UTF-8 encoded string.

Missing values in the atomic vector are represented by placeholder values, defined in the `missing-value-placeholder` attribute of the `atomic_vector/values` dataset.
The attribute should be a scalar and should have the same datatype as `atomic_vector/values`, except in the case of strings where any string datatype may be used.
All values in the dataset equal to the placeholder should be treated as missing.
See the [HDF5 policy draft (v0.1.0)](https://github.com/ArtifactDB/Bioc-HDF5-policy/tree/v0.1.0) for details.

For `type = "string"`, the `atomic_vector` group may optionally contain a `format` attribute.
If present, this should be a scalar string attribute of any HDF5 string datatype, containing one of the following values:

- `"none"`: no constraints on the contents of each string.
  This is the default behaviour if no `format` is present.
- `"date"`: strings should be dates following a `YYYY-MM-DD` format.
- `"date-time"`: strings should be Internet Date/Time values following the format described in [RFC3339](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3339).

Optionally, the `atomic_vector` group may contain `names`, a 1-dimensional string dataset of the same dimensions as `atomic_vector/values`.
This contains the name for each element in the atomic vector.
Any HDF5 string datatype may be used here.
Names should not be missing so any placeholder attribute on `names` will not be respected.

## Height

The height of the atomic vector is defined as the extent of the sole dimension of the `atomic_vector/values` dataset in `contents.h5`.
