

# Simple list (1.0)

## Overview

The `simple_list` format specifies the on-disk representation of a simple list.
This is based on an ordinary R list.

## Metadata

The `OBJECT` file should contain a `simple_list` property, itself a JSON object with the following properties:

- `version`, a string specifying the version of the `fasta_file` format.
  This should be set to "1.0".
- (optional) `format`, a string specifying the format to use.
  This should be one of `"hdf5"` or `"json.gz"`.
  If not provided, it is assumed to be `"hdf5"`.

## Files

If `format = "hdf5"`, the directory should contain a `list_contents.h5` file.
This is a HDF5 file that follows the [**uzuki2**](https://github.com/ArtifactDB/uzuki2) HDF5 specification for R lists.

If `format = "json.gz"`, the directory should contain a `list_contents.json.gz` file.
This is a Gzip-compressed JSON file that follows the [**uzuki2**](https://github.com/ArtifactDB/uzuki2) JSON specification for R lists.

The directory may contain an `other_contents` subdirectory, containing external list items as further subdirectories.
Each subdirectory in `other_contents` represents a child object and should be named after its external list index, which are consecutive zero-based indices, i.e., `"0"`, `"1"`, and so on.
Every external list index should be used at least once by the list representation in `list_contents.h5` or `list_contents.json.gz`.

## Height

The height of the sequence string set is defined as the length of the list in `list_contents.h5` or `list_contents.json.gz`.
Only the length of the top-level list is considered here.

## Interfaces

The simple list satisfies the `SIMPLE_LIST` interface. 
