

# Simple list (1.1)

## Overview

The `simple_list` format specifies the on-disk representation of a simple list.
This is based on an ordinary R list.

## Metadata

The `OBJECT` file should contain a `simple_list` property, itself a JSON object with the following properties:

- `version`, a string specifying the version of the `fasta_file` format.
  This should be set to "1.1".
- (optional) `format`, a string specifying the format to use.
  This should be one of `"hdf5"` or `"json.gz"`.
  If not provided, it is assumed to be `"hdf5"`.
- (optional) `length`, a non-negative integer specifying the length of the list.

## Files

If `format = "hdf5"`, the directory should contain a `list_contents.h5` file.
This is a HDF5 file that follows the [**uzuki2**](https://github.com/ArtifactDB/uzuki2) HDF5 specification for R lists.

If `format = "json.gz"`, the directory should contain a `list_contents.json.gz` file.
This is a Gzip-compressed JSON file that follows the [**uzuki2**](https://github.com/ArtifactDB/uzuki2) JSON specification for R lists.

If the `simple_list.length` property is present, this should be equal to the length of the list (see [below](#height)).
This property is provided as a convenience for JSON-formatted files, so that readers do not need to parse the entire file to determine the list length.

The directory may contain an `other_contents` subdirectory, containing external list items as further subdirectories.
Each subdirectory in `other_contents` represents a child object and should be named after its external list index, which are consecutive zero-based indices, i.e., `"0"`, `"1"`, and so on.
Every external list index should be used at least once by the list representation in `list_contents.h5` or `list_contents.json.gz`.

## Height

The height of the sequence string set is defined as the length of the list in `list_contents.h5` or `list_contents.json.gz`.
The length of the list is equal to its number of elements, without any consideration for the size/shape of nested lists or other objects in each element.
The length can also be taken from the `simple_list.length` property, if available.

## Interfaces

The simple list satisfies the `SIMPLE_LIST` interface. 
