

# VCF experiment (1.0)

## Overview

The `vcf_experiment` format provides an on-disk representation of a VCF-derived summarized experiment. 
It is based on the `VCF` subclasses from the [**VariantAnnotation** bioconductor package](https://bioconductor.org/packages/VariantAnnotation).

## Metadata

The `OBJECT` file should contain an `vcf_experiment` property, which is itself a JSON object with the following properties:

- `version`, a string specifying the version of the `vcf_experiment` format.
  This should be set to "1.0".
- `dimensions`, an array of the dimensions of the VCF experiment.
  This should contain two non-negative integers specifying the number of rows and columns, respectively.
- (optional) `expanded`, a boolean indicating whether loci with multiple alternative alleles are expanded into multiple records in the VCF file.
  If missing, this defaults to `false`.

## Files

The directory should contain `file.vcf.gz`, a Gzip-compressed VCF file.
The number of records should be equal to the number of rows in the `dimensions` metadata field.
The number of samples should be equal to the number of columns in the `dimensions` metadata field.
If `expanded = true`, each record should contain no more than one alternative allele.
The VCF file should be newline-terminated.

## Height

The height of the summarized experiment is defined as the number of rows, determined from the `dimensions` property in the object metadata.

## Dimensions

The dimensions of the summarized experiment is taken from the `dimensions` property in the object metadata.
